---
layout: post
title:  "Workplaces in SL"
date:   2022-01-15 07:56:47 +0530
categories: thoughts
---

Reflecting two years back - not many, compared to seasoned professionals - I can think of a few things when it comes to the choice of employment. I was (all the graduates from my Computer Science & Engineering batch of 2015 were) a keen individual - energetic and ready to give my best - to a growing economy which was an exciting prospect. IT (information technology) here in Sri Lanka is in fact, an exciting and somewhat novel prospect. Being a developing country for god-knows-how-long, Sri Lanka's demand for IT professionals is high. Although there are not a lot of IT startups here in SL in contrast to some other countries in the region, people flock up to work to join the few established organizations. One prime motive is of course, the salary. IT is a blue collar job in SL; you get a fat salary in contrast to other engineering professions. The hard-working civil, mechanical and other engineering professions get a measly sum despite the physical work a lot of them are undergoing (site visits, direct client interactions, etc.). On average, I've seen the salary of an IT professional range starting from LKR150000. I cannot assign an upper limit to this range, though. The variation is too high, and the input signals for such variations are:  experience in the field / position, skill-level, bonuses, and the like. What is crucial though, is the lower limit. The lower limit also varies, supposedly due to an individual's depth of knowledge, but as well as (surprisingly) _the degree and the graduated institution_. 

I've seen the institution taken as a signal for the basic salary in quite a number of workplaces here in SL. This is done by pidgeon-holing a group of younsters into bins of salary ranges considering the points of their "origin". I have been involved in some set of interviews, and I have seen individuals from the same institution displaying a variety of skills - all industry-ready, and with a little help, have the potential to be battle-hardened. Nevertheless, all such individuals are put into the same salary bucket. It must be noted that this is not the case for *all* of IT organizations. But quite a lot of them are adhering to this pidgeon hole theory.

As an individual who was looking onwards after the graduation, I was primarily looking towards helping the economy that actually fueled my growth. This is the typical case in Sri Lanka, where people are blessed (debatable) with the luxury of free education, which aids people in general by feeding the education system a portion of their tax. Because of the very same fact, people are sort of "obliged" to serve the taxpayers. Note that the taxpayers here in SL range from the countryman in an unimaginable dire poverty, and the countryman who is so luxurious that he choose to build houses overseas and ships dollars to overseas banks in jets (irony intended). This range, is what synthesizes the obligation. The downsides of this obligation - or perhaps we can call it the opportunity cost - is severe. It negates self-improvement and continuous growth. It is precisely because of this obligation that individuals lose the will and fail to create the passion they need in order to fuel growth thereafter. It makes such individuals lose their direction, and conveniently the organizations can leverage tons of benefits out of this. Because the employees have lost all direction in terms of their own well-being and growth, they do not seek to develop themselves. They fail to notice that they join an organization because they want to contribute **while developing themselves**. Because of the individuals' "why" is all messed up, the organizations can embrace a workforce with lesser demands. Generally, when we think about societal development as a macroscopic aspect, the organizations play a key role, which is aimed at producing a productive, well-balanced and a battle-hardened workforce. To do such, it is imperative that the employees develop while the organizations flourish. The employee's work should reflect his growth, as well as the growth of the company. It is how a loyal workforce is built - a group of people who are willing to put on the hours, talent and sweat for the betterment of their collective endeavors. When the employee gain is minimized, productivity falters, and turnout rises.

Note that this good for the employer in the short term. Imagine you are such an organization which is looking for short-term sustenance. A strategy for such an organization is to run with internships and fresh graduates. Internships and fresh graduates keep coming in cycles. Interns have a finite span of time in an organization, and they do not spend that much time and/or knowledge to realize the elements that work behind the curtains. They just do their jobs with enthusiasm because it is their first time to learn and contribute to the industry. It is also doubtful what they learn would be beneficial for them, but since the interns do not see beyond the horizons, they fail to realize this. The employer might as well gets the dirty work done by the interns. The fresh graduates also are somewhat similar, but they have a sufficient span of time and knowledge to realize the workings underneath, and soon after they realize the elements, they quit. A small portion of a quarter of the organization can become stagnated if there is a lack of both interns and fresh graduates, but once the cycle begins again, the usual elements are fast at work.

The younger genereations of Sri Lanka are bred to pass examinations. They aren't taught to live in a society full diverse individuals. For a quarter of their live they are taught the former, and miss the latter. Because of this, at the prime of their lives, they fail to extract the patterns that require them to create a career path, a direction forward and a goal for life. However, I have seen cracks in this trend (which is for good) with the slow yet steady introduction of technology to the entire country. People are slowly waking up to the standards of the rest of the world, because of the accessibility provided by the world wide web. More and more youngsters are trying to question the elements, trying to rationalize decisions that they and others make, and try to reconcile in macroscopic scale. This, is really progressive when it comes to the long term growth of both the economy and the society. But it takes time (hence the term "long-term") for the younger generations to come to power and take leadership. Until then, the current trend will continue.

